Developer Pack for Syllable/AtheOS
==================================

30 June 2003

1 Introduction
==============

This distribution is a collection of the most important binary
packages a software developer would want for the Syllable operating
system. Most of the packages were built on Syllable 0.4.3 and
optimized for a Pentium CPU. They should also run on other versions
of Syllable and on the AtheOS operating system, but this has not been
tested.

If you encounter problems or have any other interesting observations,
I would be interested to hear about them (see contact information).

2 How to install the Developer Pack on Syllable
===============================================

2.1 
----

Please note that if you want to use CVS, or if you want to use GCC
for Java, you will have to install the Zlib library, if it is not
already installed on your system. Zlib is not included in this
distribution, so you have to get that package and install it first.
You need Zlib as a shared library. The Zlib packages for Syllable are
distributed in this form from version 1.1.4 onwards.

Now for the Developer Pack installation. You may have to become the
root user to perform the following operations:

    su -l

You should have unpacked this file with

    tar -xpz

or something equivalent. The 'p' option to Tar is important: it
preserves permissions on the extracted files. Without the proper file
permissions, the installation will be broken.

Unpacking produces a number of directories for the contained
packages, this README document, and an install script. Being the root
user, run the install script:

    install.sh

The package directories will be moved to /usr, if you didn't unpack
them there already. Subsequently, the packages will be registered,
creating links in Syllable to enable it to find the package's files.
If any of the package directories already existed under /usr, they
will be unregistered and removed first. Please note, though, that
this will only work if you didn't unpack the files directly into
/usr. Also, no version of any of the packages should exist with a
different directory name under /usr, because that would lead to
conflicting package registrations.

You should now be able to use the programs in the Developer Pack.

2.2 Uninstalling & upgrading the Developer Pack
-----------------------------------------------

After installation, the Developer Pack is effectively no longer one
package, but the individual packages it contained. If you ever want
to remove one or more of those packages, you should follow the steps
outlined in the respective README.Syllable documents that are
included in each package. Usually, you will have to follow the
standard procedure. Again, you may have to become root first:

    su

Then you should remove the links to the package from Syllable.

    pkgmanager -r /usr/<package>

To delete the files belonging to the package, run:

    rm -r /usr/<package>

Upgrading to a new version of the Developer Pack is easy, since the
install script will remove the existing packages and replace them
with the new ones.

3 Known problems and limitations
================================

Please refer to the respective README and README.Syllable documents
that are included in each separate package.

4 Contact information
=====================

This Developer Pack was put together by Kaj de Vos. You can send me
problem reports, fixes and the like at

    developerpack@syllable.info

This distribution can be found in the download section of the
Syllable web site:

    http://syllable.sourceforge.net

